                                                      Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791



                                                         Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                             Computer Aided Geometric Design

                                                               www.elsevier.com/locate/cagd




Geometry and kinematics of the Mecanum wheel
A. Gfrerrer
Graz University of Technology, Institute of Geometry, Kopernikusgasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria



a r t i c l e         i n f o                            a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                         Mecanum wheels are used when omnidirectional movability of a vehicle is desired. That
Available online 4 September 2008                        means that the vehicle can move along a prescribed path and at the same time rotate
                                                         arbitrarily around its center. A Mecanum wheel consists of a set of rolls arranged around
Keywords:
                                                         the wheel axis. In this paper we describe in detail the geometry of these rolls. We derive
Mecanum wheel
Forward kinematics
                                                         simple canonical parameterizations of the roll generating curve and the roll surface itself.
Inverse kinematics                                       These parametric representations reveal the geometry of the roll. With their help we can
                                                         easily ﬁnd an approximation of the roll surface by a torus for manufacture purposes. Based
                                                         on the roll parametrization we study the kinematics of a vehicle featured with Mecanum
                                                         wheels.
                                                                                                            © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

    The Mecanum wheel (Fig. 1, left) was invented by the Swedish engineer Bengt Ilon in 1973.1 It consists of a set of k
congruent rolls placed symmetrically around the wheel body. The face of each roll is part of a surface of revolution R
whose axis b is skew to the wheel axis a. Usually an angle δ between a and b of ±45◦ is chosen. Fig. 1, right, shows (the
setup of) a mobile robot furnished with three wheels of that kind. Each of them is driven by a separate motor which gives
the vehicle the three degrees of freedom necessary for an omnidirectional movement on level ground. The advantage of this
architecture is that none of the wheels needs to be steerable. The wheel rolls rotate passively around their axes.
    The parametrization in Dickerson and Lapin (1991) of the roll generating curve is rather involved and does not reveal the
geometry of the roll. With the help of Descriptive Geometry we derive a pretty natural parametrization of this curve which
also yields simple parametric representations of the roll surface and its meridian (Section 2). In Section 3 we use these
parametrizations to replace the roll by an approximating torus surface. Moreover, we derive the exact velocity equation for
a kinematic system with a Mecanum wheel (Section 4, Eq. (15)). With “exact” we mean that the position of the contact
point C of the roll and the terrain is also taken into account. In the literature on the kinematics of Mecanum wheels it
is (as a simpliﬁcation) always assumed that C at any moment lies exactly beneath the wheel center (cf. for example with
Viboonchaicheep et al. (2003) or Siegwart and Nourbakhsh (2004, page 59)). Using this simpliﬁcation we ﬁnally study the
case of a vehicle supplied with three Mecanum wheels (Section 4.1) and give a nice geometric characterization for the
solvability of the forward kinematics of a such a robot.

2. Roll geometry of the Mecanum wheel

   The roll axes of a Mecanum wheel establish a set of k equidistant generators belonging to a regulus on a one-sheet
hyperboloid H of revolution with axis a. If the wheel moves on a plane terrain π its axis a remaining parallel to π then at


     E-mail address: gfrerrer@tugraz.at.
 1
     See the US patent 3,876,255 (Ilon, 1975).

0167-8396/$ – see front matter     © 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.cagd.2008.07.008
                                              A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791               785




                                          Fig. 1. Left: Mecanum wheel. Right: Vehicle with 3 Mecanum wheels.




                                                          Fig. 2. Curve c R generating the rolls.


each moment at least one roll touches the ground. Hereby a passive (non-driven) rotation around the roll axis b is induced
to the respective roll by the motion. Of course, it is desired to avoid vibration or jiggling of the vehicle throughout the
motion, which means that the wheel axis a must keep a constant distance to the plane π :

        dist(π , a) = r = const.                                                                                             (1)

    Hence, the question is how to construct the roll surface R so that condition (1) is fulﬁlled. Fig. 2, left, shows the
situation in ground view (ﬁrst projection) and corresponding front view (second projection)2 both, the wheel axis a and the
roll axis b, being parallel to the ﬁrst projection plane. The rays for the second projection are parallel to a, i.e., the second
image a of a is a point.
    Geometrically condition (1) means that the curve c R that generates the roll surface R has to be a part of the cylinder
Z of revolution with axis a and radius r. This curve is the locus of contact points of R with the plane π . The roll R and
the cylinder Z are tangent to each other along c R .


 2
     We mark the ﬁrst (second) image of an object by one (two) prime(s).
786                                              A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791


                   is the second image of a point C ∈ c
      If C  ∈ c R                                                                                 
                                                          R we can easily construct its ﬁrst image C :

                                                                                 is the second silhouette of R n is the
  • Let n denote the surface normal of R running through C . Since the circle c R
                      containing C  .
       diameter of c R
  • Because n is a surface normal in a contour point w.r.t. the second projection it lies parallel to the plane of this projection
    and hence its ﬁrst projection n is a horizontal line.
  • As R is a surface of revolution n has to intersect b in a point N. In this way, the ﬁrst image n of n and with it the ﬁrst
    image C  of C is ﬁxed.

   The above construction also yields a simple parametrization of c R . Let p denote the common perpendicular of a and
b and let A be the intersection point of p and a, i.e., the wheel center. We denote the distance and angle of a and b by
d and δ and introduce a coordinate system S := { A ; ex , e y , ez } whose ﬁrst and third unit vector ex and ez is on a and p,
respectively. As parameter we use the angle u between p and n. With the help of Fig. 2 we derive

                 ⎛ x(u ) ⎞        ⎛ d cot δ tan u ⎞

         x( u ) = ⎝ y ( u ) ⎠ = ⎝      r sin u    ⎠                                                                                 (2)
                    z (u )            −r cos u

as parametrization of c R . Since the two axes a and b are skew cot δ = ∞ is guaranteed.
   Eq. (2) tells us that c R in general is a rational 4th order space curve. This follows for instance by re-parameterizing c R
via τ = tan u2 .
   Only in case of b ⊥ a (δ = ± π2 ) c R is an ordinary circle with radius r. Wheels of that type are often called “Swedish
wheels” in the literature.
   Fig. 2, right, gives an impression of the curve c R which consists of two branches. It has the axis a of the cylinder Z and
the common perpendicular p of a and b as symmetry axes. Thus, the common perpendicular q of a and p is also a symmetry
axis of c R . The curve intersects p in the points P (0, 0, −r ), P (0, 0, r ) and if δ = ± π2 it has the generators g 1,2 . . . z = 0,
                                                                                                                   √   √
y = ±r of Z as asymptotes. The axis b and c R meet in the common points K 1,2 (± r 2 − d2 cot δ, ± r 2 − d2 , −d) of b
and Z .
    Since the curve c R consists of two parts in case of δ = ± π2 , the same is true for the roll surface R. Fig. 3 shows the part
of R generated by the branch of c R running through P . The roll R is a surface of revolution with axis b and a symmetry
plane σ through p and orthogonal to b. The common point B of b and p is the symmetry center of R. The circle e P ⊂ σ
through P and centered in B is an equator on R, that means it has locally maximal radius, namely r − d. The two points
K 1,2 are conical knots on R.


Remark. The surface normals n used in the construction above intersect the lines a, b and the line at inﬁnity of the yz-
plane. Hence, if δ = ± π2 they establish a generator set on a hyperbolic paraboloid P . As one can easily check P has the
equation


         xz + d cot δ y = 0.

The y-axis of the coordinate system is the axis of P and A is its vertex. The second generator set on P consists of lines
parallel to the xy-plane. Thus, P intersects the plane at inﬁnity in the two lines at inﬁnity of the xy- and yz-plane. The
curve c R is the intersection curve of P and the cylinder Z . From this fact, we can see again (in a purely geometric way)
that c R is a rational fourth order curve with the asymptotes described above. The singular point of c R is the point X ∞
at inﬁnity of the x-axis since this point is the vertex of the cylinder R and at the same time lies on the paraboloid P .
The tangent plane τ of P in X ∞ is the xy-plane and intersects the cylinder in the two tangents g 1,2 of c R in its singular
point X ∞ .
   As a surface of revolution generated by a rational curve c R R itself is also rational. If δ = ± π2 the algebraic order of
R is 8, i.e., twice the order of its generating curve c R . In the special case of δ = ± π2 the roll surface R is a torus whose
meridian circle c R intersects its axis b in K 1,2 .
   Of course, for the physical roll of the Mecanum wheel only a certain part of R lying between the knots K 1,2 is taken.
   To obtain a suitable representation of the roll surface R we use a new coordinate system S ∗ := { B ; e∗x , e∗y , e∗z } with
origin in B, x-axis x∗ = b and the new z-axis coincident with the old one (Fig. 3). W.r.t. this system the curve c R has the
parametrization

                  ⎛          2                          ⎞
                      d cos
                         sin δ
                              δ
                                tan u + r sin δ sin u
                  ⎜                                     ⎟
         x∗ (u ) = ⎝ cos δ tan u (r cos u − d) ⎠ .                                                                                  (3)
                                 d − r cos u
                                                   A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791          787




                                                                    Fig. 3. The roll surface R.


   By rotation around the x∗ -axis with angle v we ﬁnd
                      ⎛ x∗ (u , v ) ⎞       ⎛              2                                 ⎞
                                                      d cos
                                                         sin δ
                                                              δ
                                                                tan u + r sin δ sin u
                                            ⎜                                                ⎟
      y∗ (u , v ) = ⎝ y ∗ (u , v ) ⎠ = ⎝ (r cos u − d)(cos δ tan u cos v + sin v ) ⎠                                        (4)
                         z ∗ (u , v )           (r cos u − d)(cos δ tan u sin v − cos v )
as parametrization of R.
   Putting y ∗ = 0 we obtain tan v = − cos δ tan u which after substitution into the third line of (4) yields together with the
ﬁrst line a parametrization of the meridian curve mR of the roll that lies in the x∗ z∗ -plane (parameter u):
                                       2
                     x∗ (u ) = d cos
                                  sin δ
                                       δ
                                         tan u + r sin δ sin u
      mR . . .                                                              .                                               (5)
                     z∗ (u ) = − cos2 δ tan2 u + 1(r cos u − d)
    More accurately: (5) is the parametrization of one of the two branches of the meridian curve; the other branch is
symmetric to the ﬁrst one w.r.t. the axis b = x∗ of revolution and one gets its parametrization by changing the sign in front
of the square root.

3. Approximation of the roll by a torus

    As we have seen in the previous section the roll surface R of a Mecanum wheel is algebraic of order 8 generated by a
fourth order space curve c R . The natural parametrizations (Eq. 4) of the roll surface and its meridian curve (Eq. 5) can be
used for manufacturing the roll precisely. But since the rolls usually have a ﬂexible rubber coat it is suﬃcient to use a less
complicated surface which approximates R suﬃciently accurate. For instance, one could approximate the meridian curve
by a suitable conic section or a rational freeform curve. As an example, we will construct an approximating torus surface T
for the roll R.

Problem 1. Construct a torus T with axis b so that T and the roll surface R have contact of order 2 along the equator
circle e P .

    Due to the symmetry with respect to the plane σ of e P the center of the wanted torus T must be the point B. Fig. 4,
left, shows the situation in the x∗ z∗ -plane: One of the two meridian circles of R in this plane has to osculate the roll
meridian mR (Eq. (5)) at P . Let us denote this meridian circle by mT . Vice versa, if mR and mT have contact of order k in
P than the same is true for the generated surfaces R and T along e P .
    The equation of mT can be set up as

      F (x∗ , z∗ ) := x∗2 + ( z∗ − rl )2 − rm
                                            2
                                              = 0.                                                                          (6)
Here rl and rm denote the yet unknown radii of the center circle l and of the torus meridian circle mT .
788                                                 A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791




                                                        Fig. 4. Two ways to construct an approximating torus.


      By substitution of (5) into (6) we obtain the function

                                    cos2 δ
                                                            2                                               2
         f (u ) := sin2 u d                     + r sin δ       +   cos2 δ tan2 u + 1(r cos u − d) + rl             2
                                                                                                                 − rm                                  (7)
                                  sin δ cos u
in u. Since both of the curves mR and mT are symmetric w.r.t. z∗ f is an even function. Hence, all derivatives of odd order
vanish at u = 0:
                          
         ∂ f      ∂ 3 f 
                  =              = · · · = 0.
         ∂ u u =0 (∂ u )3 u =0
This is true for arbitrary values of rl , rm .
   Now we determine rl and rm so that the two additional conditions

         f (0) = (rl − d + r )2 − rm
                                   2
                                     = 0,
                 
          ∂ 2 f       (r sin2 δ + d cos2 δ)(d − rl sin2 δ)
               2    =2                                      =0
         (∂ u ) u =0                   sin2 δ
are fulﬁlled. The solution is
                  d
         rl =            ,                                                                                                                             (8)
                sin2 δ
         rm = r + d cot2 δ.                                                                                                                            (9)

For these values of rl and rm all derivatives of f up to order 3 are zero at u = 0. Therefore, the roll meridian curve mR and
the meridian circle mT of the torus have contact of order 3 in the point P . The same is true for the generated surfaces of
revolution along their common equator e P :

Theorem 1. The roll surface R and the coaxial torus T with center circle l ⊂ σ (center B, radius rl =                     d
                                                                                                                               ) and meridian circle radius
                                                                                                                        sin2 δ
rm = r + d cot δ have contact of order 3 along their common equator circle e P .
                  2



      Exactly in case of Swedish wheels (δ = ± π2 ) the torus surface T and the roll surface R are identical.
      If especially δ = ± π4 (the case that mainly occurs in praxis) the radii of the torus are

         rl = 2d,            rm = r + d .

    Theorem 1 says that close to their common equator e P the torus T approximates the roll surface R well. Fig. 4, left,
shows both roll meridian mR and torus meridian circle mT . On the other hand this ﬁgure also reveals that at some
distance from P the approximation is not satisfying. So, if a Mecanum wheel is supplied with rolls of bigger length it may
be advantageous to use a torus T̃ for the approximation whose meridian circle mT̃ is tangent to mR at P and additionally
contains another point Q of mR (Fig. 4, right). The point Q can be computed with the help of (5). The approximation order
of T̃ along e P is only C 1 but at the outside regions one obtains a better approximation.

4. Kinematics of the Mecanum wheel

   We consider a vehicle moving on level ground and furnished with Mecanum wheels like the one in (Fig. 1, right). Let us
analyze the situation for one of the wheels at a certain moment t (Fig. 5). Four systems are involved: the terrain Σ0 , the
vehicle Σ1 , the wheel Σ2 and the roll Σ3 which at that moment touches the ground at a certain point C (contact point).
Note that this point always lies beneath the axis a of the wheel Σ2 : It is the intersection point of the orthogonal projections
                                                  A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791                                          789




                                                     Fig. 5. Velocities for a vehicle with Mecanum wheels.


of the wheel axis a and the roll axis b in Σ0 . Only in case of b being in a horizontal position C lies beneath the wheel
center A!
    For the analytical description we choose an arbitrary point O 1 (“vehicle center”) in Σ1 as origin of a coordinate system
S 1 := { O 1 ; e1x , e1 y , e1z } connected with the vehicle Σ1 , the x- and y-axis being parallel to the ground. The wheel center A
may have x- and y-coordinates ax and a y w.r.t. S 1 and α may denote the angle between e1x and the wheel axis a. Then
             ⎛ cos α ⎞

        a = ⎝ sin α ⎠
                   0
is the direction vector of a. The direction vector b of the roll axis depends on the rotation angle u of the wheel as follows:
             ⎛ cos α cos δ − sin α sin δ cos u ⎞            ⎛b ⎞
                                                                x
        b = ⎝ sin α cos δ + cos α sin δ cos u ⎠ =: ⎝ b y ⎠ .                                                                                              (10)
                               sin δ sin u                     bz
W.r.t. S 1 the contact point C has the x- and y-coordinates

         c x = ax − d cos α cot δ tan u
                                              .                                                                                                           (11)
         c y = a y − d sin α cot δ tan u

    In the following considerations we can neglect the z-coordinates since the occurring velocity vectors are all parallel to
the xy-plane.
    Let ω be the angular velocity of the motion Σ1 /Σ0 (vehicle/ground) and v O 1 ,01 = ( v x , v y ) be the velocity vector of O 1
for that motion at the instant t. Then the vectorial velocity of the contact point C (c x , c y ) w.r.t. the motion Σ1 /Σ0 is3

                       v x − ωc y
        vC ,01 =                     .                                                                                                                   (12)
                       v y + ωc x
The motion Σ2 /Σ1 (wheel/vehicle) is a simple rotation around the axis a, hence, the velocity vector of C for this motion is

                         − sin α
        vC ,12 = u̇r                                                                                                                                      (13)
                          cos α

where u̇ = du
            dt
               is the angular velocity of Σ2 /Σ1 .
   The motion Σ3 /Σ2 (roll/wheel) is a rotation around b. Thus, the instantaneous vectorial velocity vC ,23 of C is perpen-
dicular to b (Eq. (10)):

                        −b y
        vC ,23 = λ               .                                                                                                                        (14)
                         bx


 3
    One can construct the vector vC ,01 from the input v O 1 ,01 , ω as indicated in Fig. 5. Here I denotes the instantaneous pole and tan θ = ω . Compare also
with Wunderlich (1970, page 22) or Bottema and Roth (1990, page 258).
790                                              A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791


   The velocity vector vC ,03 of C for the motion Σ3 /Σ0 (roll/ground) has to be zero since the (passive) roll moves on the
ground without sliding. Using the additivity rule for velocities of composed motions we obtain the condition

         vC ,01 + vC ,12 + vC ,23 = vC ,03 = o = (0, 0)

which by substitution of (12), (13), (14) yields

          r sin α u̇ + b y λ = v x − ωc y
                                                .
          r cos α u̇ + b x λ = − v y − ωc x

By elimination of λ we get the differential equation

         r (b x sin α − b y cos α )u̇ − b x ( v x − ωc y ) − b y ( v y + ωc x ) = 0                                                                    (15)

ruling the connection between the vehicle motion and the wheel rotation. The terms b x , b y , c x , c y in this equation are
functions in u according to Eqs. (10), (11) and u itself, of course, depends on time t.
    If we study the motion globally, the situation is rather complicated. While one roll of the wheel is in contact with the
ground the contact point C moves from the ﬁrst side of the wheel to the second. When the turn is on the next roll C jumps
back to the ﬁrst side again. It follows that b x (u ), b y (u ), c x (u ), c y (u ) are functions with jump discontinuities corresponding
to the changes of the rolls.4
    This is the reason that for practical purposes5 it is assumed that the contact point C in the average lies beneath the
wheel center A. By this simpliﬁcation we can put b x = cos(α + δ), b y = sin(α + δ), c x = ax , c y = a y in Eq. (15). Then we
obtain

                    1                                                                
         u̇ = −              sin(α + δ)( v y + ωax ) + cos(α + δ)( v x − ωa y ) .                                                                      (16)
                  r sin δ
      This formula allows to compute the (approximate) wheel velocity u̇ for given vehicle velocity data v x , v y , ω .

4.1. Example: Kinematics of a vehicle with three Mecanum wheels

   As an example we study the case of a vehicle supplied with three Mecanum wheels with wheel centers A i (aix , aiy ) and
wheel axis angles αi , i = 1, 2, 3. If we denote the corresponding angular velocities of the wheels by ωi then according to
Eq. (16) we have
         ⎛ω ⎞                          ⎛v ⎞
              1                           x
                                1
         ⎝ ω2 ⎠ = −                   M⎝ vy ⎠                                                                                                          (17)
                            r sin δ
           ω3                            ω
with
             ⎛ cos(α + δ) sin(α + δ) a sin(α + δ) − a cos(α + δ) ⎞
                    1           1       1x      1         1y       1
         M = ⎝ cos(α2 + δ) sin(α2 + δ) a2x sin(α2 + δ) − a2 y cos(α2 + δ) ⎠ .
                  cos(α3 + δ) sin(α3 + δ) a3x sin(α3 + δ) − a3 y cos(α3 + δ)

      Eq. (17) is the solution to the inverse kinematic problem of the vehicle:


Inverse Kinematic Problem:
Given: Angular velocity ω of the vehicle Σ1 and vectorial velocity ( v x , v y )                   of the vehicle center O 1 ;
Wanted: Angular velocities ωi of the wheels i = 1, 2, 3.


      Conversely, we have the


Forward Kinematic Problem:
Given: Angular velocities ωi of the wheels i = 1, 2, 3;
Wanted: Angular velocity ω of the vehicle Σ1 and vectorial velocity ( v x , v y )                     of the vehicle center O 1 .


  4
    Moreover, to avoid vibration the rolls are arranged around the wheel body in a way that the silhouettes of adjacent rolls are slightly overlapping. This
means that at the change of two rolls both of them are in contact with the ground for a short time interval, one close to the ﬁrst side of the wheel and
the other close to the second.
  5
    See Viboonchaicheep et al. (2003) or Siegwart and Nourbakhsh (2004, page 59).
                                               A. Gfrerrer / Computer Aided Geometric Design 25 (2008) 784–791                                     791


   Clearly, a unique solution for the forward kinematic problem exists if and only if det M = 0, namely
       ⎛v ⎞                       ⎛ω ⎞
            x                          1
       ⎝ v y ⎠ = −r sin δ M    −1 ⎝
                                      ω2 ⎠ .                                                                                                      (18)
          ω                           ω3
Our simpliﬁcation from above means that the axis b i of the roll that is in contact with the ground is assumed to be
horizontal, roll center B i and contact point C i lying exactly beneath the wheel center A i (aix , aiy ). In this position (the ﬁrst
projection of) b i has the equation

       − sin(αi + δ)(x − aix ) + cos(αi + δ)( y − aiy ) = 0.
In other words, the line coordinates of b i are
                                                                    
        − sin(αi + δ), cos(αi + δ), aix sin(αi + δ) − aiy cos(αi + δ) .
If one multiplies the second column of M with −1 and additionally exchanges this column with the ﬁrst one then the i-th
row of the modiﬁed matrix is identical with that vector. Hence, det M = 0 is equivalent to the condition that the three roll
axes meet in a common point I which can also be at inﬁnity. As a result we have

Theorem 2. The direct kinematics of a robot with three Mecanum wheels has a unique solution if and only if the wheels are arranged
so that the roll axes are not concurrent or parallel.

    In a bad wheel arrangement with the roll axes running through a common point I the possible self motion of the vehicle
is the rotation around I . In this case the three contact rolls rotate around their axes even if the wheel motors stand still.
Such an unwanted self motion might be induced by slightly inclined terrain. Of course, this effect also shows up in case of
vehicles with more than three Mecanum wheels.

5. Conclusions

   In the paper I give some detailed geometric analysis of Mecanum wheels and work out natural parametrizations of
the roll surface (Eq. (4)) and its meridian curve (Eq. (5)). The result can be used for manufacturing the rolls precisely.
Alternatively I investigate suitable approximations of the roll surface by torus patches (Section 3).
   Moreover I show that the instantaneous contact point C of a roll moves from one side of the Mecanum wheel to the
opposite as the wheel rotates. This is neglected in the standard literature which might be a reason for deviations between
the real and the predicted motion of a vehicle on such wheels. I develop the differential equation ruling the connection
between the vehicle velocity and the angular velocity of the wheel (Eq. (15)). This could be the starting point for some
more accurate analysis of the kinematics of Mecanum wheel vehicles in future research work. As a drawback the formula
requires the knowledge of the rotation angle function u = u (t ) of the wheel which may not be available in practice.
   Finally, by returning to the simpliﬁed equation between the vehicle and wheel velocities, I deliver some nice geometric
characterization of singular wheel constellations (Theorem 2).

Acknowledgements

   I cordially thank Mathias Brandstötter from the RoboCup Team at TU Graz for fruitful discussions and for providing the
ProEngineer-ﬁles of the Mecanum wheel vehicle Krikkitγ developed by the team. From this CAD model I generated the
images in Fig. 1.
   I also thank the reviewers for their help to improve the paper.

References

Bottema, O., Roth, B., 1990. Theoretical Kinematics. Dover Publications.
Dickerson, S., Lapin, B.D., 1991. Control of an omni-directional robot vehicle with Mecanum wheels. In: National Telesystems Conference I, pp. 323–328.
Ilon, B.E., 1975. Wheels for a course stable selfpropelling vehicle movable in any desired direction on the ground or some other base. US Patents and
    Trademarks Oﬃce, Patent 3,876,255.
Siegwart, R., Nourbakhsh, I.R., 2004. Introduction to Autonomous Mobile Robots. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Viboonchaicheep, P., Shimada, A., Kosaka, Y., 2003. Position rectiﬁcation control for Mecanum wheeled omni-directional vehicles. In: Proc. of the 29th
    Annual Conference of the IEEE, pp. 854–859.
Wunderlich, W., 1970. Ebene Kinematik. Bibliographisches Institut Mannheim.
